It’s Friday night. In the back room of a backstreet bar, a crowd of tipsy millennials are enjoying a late-night stand-up set by one of America’s biggest sitcom stars. Jeff Garlin, of Curb Your Enthusiasm fame, is playing to around a hundred people, and the atmosphere is electric. It’s intimate and unpredictable, everything stand-up comedy ought to be.
Driven by big business, live comedy has become terribly corporate, with TV stars charging Premier League prices for tickets to safe, conformist shows in plush theatres and anonymous stadia. There’s no spit and sawdust, precious little risk or danger. But now a new generation of comedians have found a brand new way of doing things.
At the Edinburgh Festival, where prices for mainstream shows have been rising remorselessly, up-and-coming comics have started letting audiences in for free. Instead, you pay what you want on the way out. It sounds like a daft idea but it seems to work. And now this new sales strategy is spreading across the country. Luisa Omielan is one of a growing number of comics who’ve built a fan base by introducing that “pay as you leave” approach to gigs all over Britain, relying on social media and word of mouth to spread the word about her act.
Eventually, a comedy club caught on. The Angel Comedy Club night – in a room above a pub in Islington, north London – kicked off in 2010 and spearheaded a policy of “pay what you can, when you leave”.
It became so successful that it ended up staging shows seven nights a week. A year ago, the comics who run this club took this concept to an entirely different level when they clubbed together and bought their own pub, around the corner. The Bill Murray is hidden down a quiet backstreet, with no passing trade, yet tonight the place is packed.
“This club is a symptom of people doing it for the passion,” explains one of the comics behind this venue, Barry Ferns, in the bar before the show. “This club isn’t about making shedloads of cash.”
Barry has been doing stand-up ever since he was a teenager, and though he worked fairly regularly, with some success, he never made much money. It was the usual story. To build a profile as a comic he had to take a show to Edinburgh, and even though those shows went well, the overheads cleaned him out. Yet rather than admit defeat, he teamed up with three pals, bought the lease on backstreet pub The Mucky Pup and turned it into a comedy club.
Comedians have been running comedy clubs for years – it’s how alternative comedy got started – but those were just pop-up clubs in pub function rooms rented by the hour. None of them thought of actually buying a pub, until Barry and his business partners (Rachel Corino, Dec Munro and Sarah Pearce) came along. Barry put in £40,000 (he’d been left some money by his grandad). The others put in £20,000. Remarkably, they also raised £40,000 from Kickstarter. They only opened a year ago, and they’re already breaking even.